Introduce `snap_trackEvent` method (#165)
MetaMask/SIPs: SIPS/sip-32.md

---
sip: 32
title: Add `snap_trackEvent` method for pre-installed Snaps
status: Draft
author: Daniel Rocha (@danroc)
created: 2025-03-20
---

## Abstract

This Snap Improvement Proposal (SIP) introduces a new method,
`snap_trackEvent`, allowing pre-installed Snaps to submit tracking events
through the client. The client will determine how to handle these events.

> This feature enables Snaps to utilize the existing MetaMask client

Reviewer: the existing client infrastructure (drop MetaMask)

infrastructure for event tracking while maintaining user privacy.

## Motivation

Currently, there is no standardized way for pre-installed Snaps to submit
analytics or tracking events. This proposal aims to:

> - Enable pre-installed Snaps to reuse MetaMask’s event tracking infrastructure.

Reviewer: Enable pre-installed Snaps to _leverage_ MetaMask's event tracking infrastructure.

- Allow the MetaMask client to control event handling, ensuring security and
  compliance with privacy policies.

## Specification

### Language

The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD",
"SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "NOT RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" written
in uppercase in this document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC
2119](https://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc2119.txt)

### `snap_trackEvent`

The `snap_trackEvent` method allows pre-installed Snaps to submit structured
tracking events to the client. It is the client’s responsibility to process
these events accordingly.

> The client MUST ensure that only pre-installed Snaps can call this method.

Reviewer: Is there some endowment that guarantees this? Is the endowment only available to pre-installed Snaps? I think we need to document how this is enforced.

Author: I think it's an implementation detail _how_ the client enforces it.

Reviewer 2: Not necessarily, it is important to include in the spec if a new permission is required.

That being said, I think we could make this available to all preinstalled Snaps without a permission/endowment.

WDYT @Mrtenz?

Reviewer 3: > That being said, I think we could make this available to all preinstalled Snaps without a permission/endowment.

I agree, I don't see a reason to make this permissioned.

Reviewer 2: For the specs sake you can just add something like
```
`snap_trackEvent` is endowed on any Snap that the client considers preinstalled.
```

Similar to https://metamask.github.io/SIPs/SIPS/sip-30

The `snap_trackEvent` method is defined as follows:

#### Parameters

- `event` - Event object to be tracked.
  - `category: string` - The category to associate the event.

>   - `name: string` - The name of the event to track.

Reviewer 2: Hmm, wouldn't `event.event` be easier so we don't require mapping?

>   - `name: string` - The name of the event to track.

Author: Probably yes, I just didn't want to leak this into the API, but I don't have a strong opinion on this.

>   - `name: string` - The name of the event to track.

Reviewer: I'm fine with `event.event`

>   - `name: string` - The name of the event to track.

Author: Reopening this. @Vahid-flipside shared an internal document that uses `name` instead, so it looks like the extension should be updated to use `name` instead of `event`.

>   - `name: string` - The name of the event to track.

Reviewer: OK event.name is fine

  - `properties: Record<string, Json>` - (**Optional**) Custom values to track.
    The client MUST enforce that all keys in this object are in the

>     `snake_case` format.

Reviewer 3: Is this actually a requirement for our analytics, or simply a convention?

Author: The data team might want to enforce it in the future, but currently it's only a convention

---
sip: 32
title: Add `snap_trackEvent` method for pre-installed Snaps
status: Draft
author: Daniel Rocha (@danroc)
created: 2025-03-20
---

## Abstract

This Snap Improvement Proposal (SIP) introduces a new method,
`snap_trackEvent`, allowing pre-installed Snaps to submit tracking events
through the client. The client will determine how to handle these events.

This feature enables Snaps to utilize the existing MetaMask client
infrastructure for event tracking while maintaining user privacy.

## Motivation

Currently, there is no standardized way for pre-installed Snaps to submit
analytics or tracking events. This proposal aims to:

- Enable pre-installed Snaps to reuse MetaMask’s event tracking infrastructure.

- Allow the MetaMask client to control event handling, ensuring security and
  compliance with privacy policies.

## Specification

> > The `snap_trackEvent` method allows pre-installed Snaps to submit structured
> > tracking events to the client. It is the client’s responsibility to process
> > these events accordingly.
> >
> > It's the client's responsibility to ensure that only pre-installed Snaps can
> > call this method.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `snap_trackEvent` method allows pre-installed Snaps to submit structured
tracking events to the client. It is the client’s responsibility to process
these events accordingly.

The client MUST ensure that only pre-installed Snaps can call this method.
```

### `snap_trackEvent`

The `snap_trackEvent` method is defined as follows:

#### Parameters

- `event` - Event object to be tracked.
  - `category: string` - The category to associate the event.

>   - `name: string` - The name of the event to track.

Reviewer 2: Do we need to uphold any rules for the format for these?

Author: I don't think so, at least I didn't find any recommendation about it. I'll try to check with the data team.

Author: I got this answer from data:

> The constraints what we impose semantically in order to preserve the continuity of the analytics; same name and same format as the event fired by extension, newly installed snaps, etc.

It seems that we cannot enforce a name format here.

  - `properties: Record<string, Json>` - (**Optional**) Custom values to track.
    Keys in this object must be `snake_case`.

  - `sensitiveProperties: Record<string, Json>` - (**Optional**) Sensitive
    values to track. These properties will be sent in an additional event that
    excludes the user's `metaMetricsId`. Keys in this object must be in

>     `snake_case`.

Reviewer 2: Should the format of these actually be validated?

Please use the MUST/SHOULD keywords

#### Returns

Resolves to `null` when the event is successfully handled by the client.

#### Example

```typescript
await snap.request({
  method: 'snap_trackEvent',
  params: {
    event: {
      category: 'Accounts',
      name: 'Account Added',
      properties: {
        message: 'Snap account added',
      },
      sensitiveProperties: {
        account_type: 'Hardware Wallet',
      },
    },
  },
});
```

### Language

The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD",
"SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "NOT RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" written
in uppercase in this document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC

> 2119](https://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc2119.txt)

Reviewer 2: Please move this to the top of the spec

> ## Backwards compatibility
> 
> Any SIPs that break backwards compatibility MUST include a section describing
> those incompatibilities and their severity. The SIP SHOULD describe how the
> author plans on proposes to deal with such these incompatibilities.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```
